# "Well, Interaction is just Problematic": ICIDS 2019
*November 20, 2019*

Thanks to my Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program funding, I was able to attend my first academic conference ever in November! ICIDS 2019 (the International Conference for Interactive Digital Storytelling) is the weirdest and most fantastic conference I think I could have picked to start out with. ICIDS is so unusual and awesome because it’s incredibly multidisciplinary. Over the week, I listened to presentations about topics as diverse as database programming and fandom culture, went to both a poster gallery and an art exhibit, and had some incredibly free-range conversations.

Fortunately for me, the conference was hosted by the University of Utah’s computer science and entertainment arts programs this year. After a nine-hour drive, I arrived at Snowbird Mountain Resort near Salt Lake City to attend some workshops the day before presentations began.

The first was called “Designing Narrative Engagement in Cinematic VR”. Dr. Miriam Vosmeer, a professor (and ex-soap opera writer!) from Amsterdam, welcomed our morning workshop group to ICIDS by having us watch a piece called “Meeting Rembrandt”. In the piece, you travel back in time to visit the artist Rembrandt in his studio. The piece is maybe 5 minutes long, and as I found out later, incorporates subtle story branching through eye tracking. The character Rembrandt asked me to turn my head to pose for him, and his dialogue changed based on my response. The production quality was very high, and the character of Rembrandt was very engaging. I felt the story development and interaction design weren’t at the same level.

Dr. Vosmeer used the rest of the workshop to present her personal research into CVR design and lead a discussion about Meeting Rembrandt. Her work focuses on embodiment (representations of the player’s body) in virtual worlds and its effect on presence. For example, her team created a piece to accompany a circus-themed TV show, in which they investigated how to best give the player a sense of their physical body walking a virtual tightrope. By Vosmeer’s standards, good storytelling entails removing sources of discomfort and designing interaction that draws attention to the story, not the medium. I was very interested in Vosmeer’s work, however, the workshop strayed into a conversation about the differences between film and game design and affordances, and we didn’t return to CVR or Rembrandt for the rest of the workshop. At least the second half of the workshop brought up my favorite quote of the entire conference: “Well, interaction is just problematic!”

The afternoon workshop, “Card-Based Prototyping in Interactive Storytelling Pedagogy”, was led by a team of professors from another European university which features an interactive narrative design MINOR. It looks fantastic! The team has clearly put a lot of work into structuring their program and designing tools for their students, one of which is a large worksheet that helps designers to create thorough and well-reinforced narrative proposals. The worksheet features topics grouped across three categories: experience/emotional design, interaction design, and storyworld design. It was extremely thorough, and I look forward to using it for my own projects. I’ll link it here once I find it online.

The next three days featured paper presentations bookended by keynote speeches and galleries. While all three keynotes were fascinating, my favorite was presented on the first day by Aaron A. Reed. Reed is an independent game and interactive fiction developer from the United States, who is currently crowdfunding a novel which alters its own content every time it is ordered. He talked about the challenges of designing stories and systems for each other, how to design highly unusual content for traditional spaces, and designing from real life. I really liked his comparison of current interactive storytelling work to “incunables”, the wildly inconsistent first books that were published shortly after the invention of the printing press.

The paper presentations covered a crazy range of topics. I wasn’t able to follow most of them entirely, but I found it very interesting to learn about everything happening in this field. These researchers are grappling with some big, complex questions at the intersections of narrative and interactivity. Can a syntax of storytelling gestures be created and used as a method for story authorship? How can we, as allies, ethically share the stories of minorities and disempowered groups in interactive digital storytelling work? What would it look like to add procedurally generated narrative puzzles to procedural open-world games such as Minecraft or No Man’s Sky? While very few presentations touched directly on CVR, I was inspired and intrigued by almost all of them.

The afternoon galleries were an art exhibit and a poster gallery. The art exhibit was a collection of games and interactive storytelling work submitted by members. A few that stood out were a 2D shoot-em-up with the main mechanic of healing war victims in your path, and a VR volumetric video piece about a character’s mental breakdown. I found that the poster gallery included much more VR content than the paper presentations, and even got to meet one of the authors of my favorite paper of the year, Guidance in Cinematic Virtual Reality-Taxonomy, Research Status and Challenges.

ICIDS wasn’t perfect. There were plenty of clichés from all different genres: trite games about personal experiences with depression, incredibly vague papers, overloaded vocabulary words that no two people used the same way. Perhaps worst of all, I was massively disappointed to discover that the conference is pronounced “eye-kids”, not “eye-sids”. However, by the time I left on Friday, I had a very different perspective on how to approach my own project, and a lot of inspiration to motivate me to start working on it. I’m so grateful that I was able to spend my week talking about such cool stuff with such cool people. Hopefully I’ll have a chance to see some of them again next year (and maybe present my own work!)
